master
containers	ready for 0.2				Chests etc
clowns		active for 0.2				Clowns' card tricks
pets		active						Tame, neutral or monster-monster fights
youmonster	active						Player race with nonstandard bodyplans
autofeel	active						Calculating feeling thresholds
timelord	merged						Timelord's techniques, etc.
homequests	inactive, merged			Home quests / shared home
guardians	inactive, merged			The mini-dungeons need an endboss
supers		merged						Superhero/villains as an extension
playtest	inactive					Save stable branch for playtesting
personality	inactive, merged			Personalities
multiego	inactive, merged			Multiple ego items
winquest	inactive, merged			The replacement for Morgoth
borg		inactive, experimental		Porting the Borg
artifacts	inactive, merged			Randarts / halfarts etc.
mutants		inactive, merged			Mutated monsters
resist		inactive, merged			Resistance by steps
sliding		inactive, merged			Sliding (mixed) classes
champions	just resting, experimental	Champions (ghosts)
world		inactive, merged			Multi-town world
ego			inactive, merged			New ego item allocation method
stores		inactive, merged			New store options
timelimit	inactive, merged			Danger level increasing with time
